I will share with you the main
conclusions of a strategic
consultancy project
that we led Rafa, Gozalo and
I a few years ago.
Why is it?
Because I think it will help
you understand well what are the
benefits of making a more
customer-centric segmentation and
using the customer person.
This project was developed for Sandod,
which is a pharmaceutical
laboratory and I will briefly
explain its business model.
Sandod sells its distribution
channel, which is the pharmacies,
and sells generic medicines to
the pharmacies mainly.
So, Sandod what you have to do
is manage or push the business
through its channel, which are
the pharmacies.
And how does it?
It does so through the commercial
department, which is the commercial
delegates spread across
the geography and each delegate
has a route assigned
to pharmacies.
And they also have the support
of the marketing department that
what it does is to create and
offer services to the pharmacies,
which are services that help
commercials to sell basically,
and are services of all kinds,
since from a trip to material for
the pharmacy to training
programs of any type.
In addition, the objectives
set by each delegate are
to increase their sales volume
in their pharmacy route compared
to the previous year in a
percentage.
very simple.
But we'll look at the segmentation
strategy, because that's what
we're learning these
days.
How did Sandod segment?
And I'll share the table with the
same variables we've learned.
Well, since geographic segmentation
here is important because from
that segmentation
you define the routes.
And here there were important variables
like whether they are near or far from
a medical center, etc.
But that is not the important thing now.
Demographic variables are important
also because the demographic
variables in this case are,
for example, the square meters
of the pharmacy, the number
of employees, the volume of
invoice, etc.
All these variables are put into
a bag, in a filter and allow you
to set the routes to the trading.
This information, of course, comes out
or comes out of IMS, which is
a consultant that has the
information of the entire sector.
And Sandod, like almost all
companies of this type,
uses mainly behavioral
segmentation that is
ABC segmentation.
What Sandod does is permanently
measure how much each of the pharmacies
generates and segment and assigns
more resources or priorities to
the pharmacies to which it sells
more, which more business
is generating.
Now, let's make a diagnosis
of what we've seen so
far.
What are the problems or areas
of improvement?
I would say two.
One, Sandod is conditioned
by what he is doing so far.
That is, we've seen that you're
using ABC segmentation, which
is what Sandod is selling to
these pharmacies, but you're forgetting,
you're losing a lot of
things, you're forgetting about
the customer, you're forgetting
how you could grow inside
each of the customers.
And two, this segmentation,
which is very related to the
above, does not allow you to understand
well the challenges, the motivations
of each of the customers.
In the end, what is happening is
that many opportunities are being missed.
It is fixed on what it does, how much
it sells to a customer, but is
not able to understand it well
and to think how it could improve
it otherwise, it is a very
product-centric posture.
That is, it's a posture where they'
re thinking about what they sell
to the customer, but they're not
thinking about how the customer
is and what that customer
needs, right?
well well.
Now, let's go to the detail of the project.
Let us start with the goal.
What was the goal?
Sell more of it.
It cannot be more strategic.
What was the main step
we had to take to
this goal?
Understand and know our customers
better, the pharmacies,
with the aim of generating relationships
with greater linkage with
them and to be able to really
adapt to the knowledge
of those customers.
Well, here the main premise
or the real key is that, unlike
what they were doing
in that pharmacies were
treated as pure statistics,
we did what we did
is customize that.
We realized that behind the
pharmacies, behind the Excel
and behind the statistics,
there are people, there are
pharmacists, there are businessmen
who have, each of them
has challenges,
motivations, different needs.
And if we can understand that,
if we truly reach the minds
and hearts of our customers
and adapt Sandoz's proposals
to each of those pharmaceuticals,
we will get Sandoz to
sell a lot more.
Go to the detail.
Back to segmentation.
Remember that Sandoz was
using geographic, demographic
and behavioral variables.
We have built a richer
segmentation, more
person-based.
We incorporate or identify that
there are a number of different
profiles within pharmaceuticals.
Profiles based on attitudes, that
they are more innovative, more
conservative, etc.
Basically what we did is a one
to five star segmentation
with the different pharmaceutical
profiles.
At one end, younger pharmacists,
with more desire to improve, with
more open minds, etc.
And in the other extreme the opposite.
I think you can get the idea.
And the key here is that we incorporate
segmentation into function,
this is the true key, we incorporate
segmentation according to
the problems, challenges
and motivations of
those pharmaceuticals.
That by the way is very
related to profiles, because
each of the profiles we saw
has a number of similar challenges,
I say.
I will summarize it.
The 4 and 5 star pharmacies, for
example, which are the pharmacies
with a more innovative profile,
what they were demanding from us
is services aimed at helping them
grow as entrepreneurs, help
them better manage their pharmacy,
help them innovate, etc.
Instead, the pharmacies with less potential,
those profiles of less innovative
pharmaceuticals, what they are
looking for is other things.
What they are looking for is that
you don't tell them stories, that you talk
about discounts, etc.
From all this information,
we created the customer
person.
We created the customer person
of the 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 star pharmacies
and described them in detail,
how they are, what they want,
how they relate to the delegate,
etc.
Well, from all this, what we
did is adapt the entire marketing
and marketing strategy.
And I will briefly tell you how
we adapt the marketing and
marketing strategy to those
4 and 5 star pharmacies.
Well, we prioritized the routes
of delegates, what we did was prioritize
those pharmacies at the expense
of eliminating the pharmacies
with less potential, which came
out of the routes.
We trained delegates so that the
commercial approach, so that the
relationship with those 4 and 5
star pharmacists, which you
remember have a certain profile,
rather than being a product-based,
price-based conversation,
were a different conversation.
They were a more business conversation,
focused on increasing the link.
We can and want to help you.
In addition, they adapted, remember
that I told you at the beginning,
that the marketing department
supports delegates with a number
of services.
Well, because the marketing
services offered or offered
to those pharmacies have evolved.
And instead of offering them travel
or discounts, what we talked about
was services aimed at helping
you improve your business.
By the way, what we created is a presencial
MBA in a series of journeys that
we offered to the pharmacies with
the highest potential of 4 and 5 stars,
because they were people with
desires to improve.